---
layout: project
title: Engineering Ethics 737 MAX Case Study
description: A brief essay demonstrating the content covered in MAE 4300 pertaining to the Boeing 737 MAX tragedies
technologies: [Ethical Analysis]
image: /assets/images/737-crash.jpg
---
One of the most pertinent case studies in engineering ethics of the recent past pertains to the Boeing 737 MAX. Boeing’s nondisclosure of the MCAS (Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System) to pilots and the FAA alike had catastrophic consequences, ultimately resulting in two fatal commercial airline crashes in 2018. The following examination narrows the focus of the ethical issue that was the 737 MAX’s development, release, and demise down to five essential questions and their ideal answers while examining nuances that may make the answers less obvious than they seem. 

**Should Boeing have disclosed more about the MCAS system to the FAA and in pilot documentation?** This question is central to the Boeing 737 MAX case because there is evidence which suggests that the tragedies could have been prevented if there was more transparency surrounding the MCAS system, both in documentation targeted at the FAA and pilot documentation. Interestingly, the FAA was part of the decision to remove MCAS from the Flight Crew Operations Manual, but they were missing a critical piece of information about the system. The FAA engineer in charge of reviewing the 737 MAX’s system safety assessment stated that they were not informed when MCAS’s range was increased from 0.55 degrees to 2.5 degrees on the horizontal stabilizer when the system was delegated to Boeing’s control (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.). Boeing had in fact increased the maximum range of MCAS by over 300%, meaning that it had much more control over the aircraft’s motion than before (FAA, 2020). In addition, according to the FAA representative responsible, the decision to remove MCAS from the Flight Operations Crew Manual was verbally approved in a meeting and was not officially documented (FAA, 2020). Perhaps if more representatives had noticed this decision in the case that it was officially documented, red flags would have been raised.

In the Lion Air crash in 2018, it was reported that pilots tried repeatedly to stop the plane and were unable to (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.). An aviation expert who analyzed the flight data noticed that the plane was continually trying to push its nose down, describing this anomaly as a black box (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.). It was later determined that MCAS had activated repeatedly on the aircraft due to faulty angle of attack sensor data. A very similar situation occurred during the Ethiopian airlines flight which crashed about 4 months later (FAA, 2020).  Not only did Boeing not fully disclose the MCAS system’s reliance on a single angle of attack sensor to the FAA (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.), but Boeing’s software contractor had made the angle of attack disagree cockpit alert, which would alert pilots that there was a problem with one of the sensors, part of an optional package available for purchase. This package was purchased by only 20% of 737 MAX customers (FAA, 2020).

If there had been better communication by Boeing with the FAA about MCAS’s true capabilities, the FAA may have been more concerned about the system and taken better control over its certification, guaranteeing its absolute safety before it went to the production lines. In addition, if Boeing had disclosed the system to pilots, they may have understood what was happening in the aircraft that crashed and been able to better communicate amongst themselves and with air traffic control about what to do since the angle of attack sensor would be the clear culprit of the issue.

**Should Boeing have conducted a serious engineering analysis of the 737 MAX following the first crash in 2018?** This question is critical because Boeing’s dismissive nature of the role the engineering of the 737 MAX played in the Lion Air crash contributed to the laxness of the subsequent safety measures taken. Boeing initially blamed the pilots for the Lion Air tragedy in 2018 and maintained that the 737 MAX was safe to fly (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.). After the first tragedy, Boeing issued a statement which did not directly mention MCAS but did outline pilot procedures to perform in case of the type of erroneous nose-down movement of the aircraft that had occurred on the doomed Lion Air flight (FAA, 2020). The FAA also issued a statement, which they concluded in addition to Boeing’s statement was sufficient to mitigate the risk of operating the 737 MAX for a limited amount of time (FAA, 2020). However, in the Ethiopian Airlines crash just 4 months later, pilots failed to perform the procedures outlined in these statements (FAA, 2020).
          	
It is clear that the statements issued by Boeing and the FAA were not enough to inform pilots of the 737 MAX and prevent future tragedy. Since the Lion Air crash involved erroneous nose-down movements that pilots were unable to control, Boeing engineers, knowing the nature of the MCAS system, should have quickly investigated the possibility that this behavior was due to an engineering issue. Having the most informed party look into the issue is the best way to guarantee resolution.

**Should Boeing have prioritized cost over other factors in the development of the 737 MAX?** Cost is a huge driving factor for many companies – so much so that it can sometimes overtake other pillars such as safety and reputability, leading to terrible long-term consequences. Boeing’s in-the-moment decision to prioritize cost during the design of the 737 MAX ended up costing them a lot more than the dollars they were trying to save.

One of the major reasons Boeing avoided including the MCAS system in pilot documentation is that they committed to paying Southwest Airlines $1 million per aircraft delivered to them if the 737 MAX required a high level of simulator training, which incentivized keeping pilot training requirements as minimal as possible (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.). There was also general pressure within the company to keep the costs of manufacturing and certifying the 737 MAX as low as possible. Rick Ludtke, a Boeing engineer who worked on the 737 MAX’s cockpit, emphasized the pressure that engineers were experiencing to both avoid costs and simplify the training differences with older models (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.). This would ultimately backfire for the company. Following the 2018 tragedies, Boeing was accused of criminal charges of conspiracy to defraud the United States and ended up paying $2.5 billion (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.), likely much more than they saved by cutting manufacturing and training costs.

By prioritizing cutting costs in the manufacturing and certification of the 737 MAX, Boeing ended up losing not only billions of dollars but also their reputation as a company that makes safe, reliable aircraft.  

**Should Boeing have resolved the “catastrophic event” experienced in the simulator before the release of the 737 MAX?** It is reasonable to assume that the “catastrophic event” experienced by test pilots in the simulation for the 737 MAX could have come about due to a similar system failure as was experienced by the pilots of the Lion Air and Ethiopian Airlines flights that crashed. Regardless, anything deemed a “catastrophic event” is worthy of investigation by engineers prior to the certification of an aircraft.

In 2012, a Boeing test pilot stated that he experienced a “catastrophic event” when MCAS activated in simulator that would have led to loss of the airplane if it had been a real flight (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.). In addition, Boeing did not test the effects of multiple MCAS activations and assumed that multiple unintended activations of the system would be no worse than a single activation (FAA, 2020). This premature conclusion was not reported to the FAA. Boeing should undoubtedly have tested these conditions, as multiple MCAS activations were what led to both the Lion Air and Ethiopian Airlines tragedies.

If Boeing engineers had paid attention to the “catastrophic” simulator event, it is possible they would have discovered the root of the issues that caused the two 2018 crashes and been able to correct for them, or realized that they needed to provide documentation of MCAS and a shutdown procedure for the system in the event of such a failure. It is a massive engineering failure to ignore or wave off anything deemed a “catastrophic event” during testing.

**Should the FAA have immediately grounded the 737 MAX following the tragedies?** This question is critical to the 737 MAX case because it pertains to measures taken to ensure the safety of future pilots and passengers of the 737 MAX. The main focus of the FAA should at all times be safety.

Even after the Lion Air crash in 2018, which seemed like an anomaly at the time, the FAA predicted that if no action were taken there could be 15 more fatal failures of the system over the lifespan of the current 737 MAX fleet (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.). Their solution to this was to give Boeing time to fix the MCAS system while keeping the aircraft in operation (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.).  However, Boeing was not quick enough to prevent further tragedy, with the Ethiopian Airlines tragedy occurring just 4 months later. After this second crash, individual aviation authorities around the world began to ground the 737 MAX even before the FAA, who resisted grounding the aircraft and was the last agency to do so (“Boeing’s Fatal Flaw”, n.d.).

If the FAA had grounded the 737 MAX following the Lion Air crash, it is possible that Boeing not only would have fixed MCAS without the need for another senseless tragedy to happen but also felt more pressured to find and fix the root problem with the aircraft being grounded. Unfortunately, the FAA’s blind faith in Boeing as a historically reliable organization was misplaced, proving why they should always air on the side of caution and skepticism when it comes to new technologies. The FAA’s resistance to grounding the aircraft was a failure of the agency to prioritize safety over company relations.

From an outside perspective, it is easy to point fingers in a serious case such as this. However, it is important to consider the pressure engineers and managers at Boeing were under from higher-ups in the organization to pass the 737 MAX through regulation as quickly as possible. These individuals likely feared for their jobs, especially with Boeing’s shift in priorities given their tense competition with Airbus at the time.  It is also important to note that FAA regulators were not the experts on the aircraft. Although they are undoubtedly to blame for resisting the grounding of the 737 MAX and for blindly trusting Boeing with the MCAS system, it is unlikely that they had a complete understanding of what exactly caused both crashes. MCAS was completely uncharted territory with no existing regulatory standards, and it was ultimately up to the designers of the system to outline the risks. 

The Boeing 737 MAX case reveals several truths about the current state of the engineering world, and several changes that need to be made to move forward in an ethical way. Companies and corporations need to start being questioned at the same level and viewed with the same skepticism by the public that individuals are. Even supposedly reputable organizations need to continue to be viewed with a lens of safe skepticism and be held to the utmost standards of safety. On the federal level, federal organizations need not maintain loyalty to corporations and instead must view them with a cooperative, but critical eye. Combined with public advocacy and the continued incorporation of ethical content into engineering curricula, these principles will lead us to a safer world with a healthier balance of organizational power.

Citations 

Boeing’s fatal flaw: A comprehensive report on the 737 MAX crisis [PDF]. (n.d.). Based on Boeing’s troubled 737 Max plane: Boeing’s fatal flaw – update full documentary (PBS Frontline)

Federal Aviation Administration. (2020). Timeline of Activities Leading to the Certification of the Boeing 737 MAX 8 Aircraft and Actions Taken After the October 2018 Lion Air Accident (Report No. AV2020037). U.S. Department of Transportation Office of Inspector General.
